Add release notes for v0.9.4 (#2081)
scalameta/metals: website/blog/2020-09-19-lithium.md

---
author: Tomasz Godzik
title: Metals v0.9.3 - Lithium
authorURL: https://twitter.com/TomekGodzik
authorImageURL: https://github.com/tgodzik.png
---

> We're happy to announce the release of Metals v0.9.4, which focused on improving
> the Scala 3 worksheets as well as a number of smaller improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're happy to announce the release of Metals v0.9.4, which focuses on improvements in Scala 3 worksheets, a couple of new features, and a number of smaller improvements.
```

<table>
<tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>Commits since last release</td>
    <td align="center">105</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Merged PRs</td>
    <td align="center">44</td>
  </tr>
    <tr>
    <td>Contributors</td>
    <td align="center">6</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Closed issues</td>
    <td align="center">15</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>New features</td>
    <td align="center">2</td>
  </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

For full details: https://github.com/scalameta/metals/milestone/27?closed=1

Metals is a language server for Scala that works with VS Code, Vim, Emacs,
Sublime Text, Atom and Eclipse. Metals is developed at the
[Scala Center](https://scala.epfl.ch/) and [VirtusLab](https://virtuslab.com)
with the help from [Lunatech](https://lunatech.com) along with contributors from
the community.

## TL;DR

Check out [https://scalameta.org/metals/](https://scalameta.org/metals/), and
give Metals a try!

- Scala 0.26.0 and 0.27.0-RC1 support.
- Analyze stacktrace command
- Customizable package exclusions

> ## Analyze stacktrace command

Author: @kpbochenek Could you check if this makes sense?

Reviewer 2: looks okay :+1:

> Thanks to [kpbochenek](https://github.com/kpbochenek) Metals can now help with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thanks to [kpbochenek](https://github.com/kpbochenek), Metals can now help with
```

navigating stack traces using the new `metals.analyze-stacktrace` command. The
only thing it needs is the actual stack trace string to be input as a parameter

> to the command. This new functionality works differently in Visual Studio Code
> and other supported editors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the command. This new functionality works differently in various editors and is currently only implemented in Visual Studio Code.
```

Reviewer: - [ ] Change the wording on this if https://github.com/scalameta/metals-vscode/pull/371/files gets merged before the release

> - for Visual Studio Code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Visual Studio Code
```

The only thing users need to do is copy the stack trace and run the
`Analyze Stacktrace` command from the command palette. This will display a new
web view, where it will be possible for users to navigate the files that are
included in the exception.

![stacktrace-vscode](https://i.imgur.com/WBU4hvT.gif)

> 

Reviewer: ### coc-metals

With coc-metals, you just need to copy the stacktrace, whether from sbt, bloop-cli, or somewhere else into your register. Once you have it copied, you can just execute the `metals.analyze-stacktrace` command. This will create a `.metals/stracktrace.scala` file which can be used to navigate through your stacktrace using code lenses. Keep in mind that you'll want to make sure you have `codeLens.enable` set to true in your configuration.

![stacktrace-coc-metals](https://i.imgur.com/tQjiAG2.gif)

Author: Thanks! Added it!

> - for other editors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Other editors
```

To make it work with any other editors users need to run the command manually
with the stacktrace as input. The command will generate a new file inside
`.metals/stacktrace.scala` which can be used to navigate throught the stacktrace

> using code lenses.

Author: @ckipp01 do you maybe have a recording of the functionality working or should I skip it for other editors for now?

Reviewer 2: there is no implementation for other editors, needs to be skipped now.

Reviewer: Yup, I still need to add this to `coc-metals`. Thanks for the reminder 😬

Reviewer: Ok actually neverming, if we can get https://github.com/scalameta/metals/pull/2083 merged in before the release, I'll have the `coc-metals` implementation done. I was originally was waiting because when using Vimspector to run the code, it actually doesn't print the stacktrace like you'd want in the run window, which I thought was a blocker. _However_ I realized that some people (like me), who prefer to just run stuff directly with bloop-cli or sbt could also really benefit from this, but it just took a little tweak in the implementation to strip out `[E]` or `[error]` when creating the lenses. Later today I'll get a better gif than the one in the pr for you to include here.

> To make it work with any other editors users need to run the command manually
> with the stacktrace as input. The command will generate a new file inside
> `.metals/stacktrace.scala` which can be used to navigate throught the stacktrace
> using code lenses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make it work with any other editors users need to run the command manually
with the stacktrace as input, similar to the example above with `coc-metals`. The command will generate a new file, `.metals/stacktrace.scala`, which can be used to navigate through the stacktrace using code lenses.
```

Since we can now have a coc-metals section, we can change the wording up here a bit.

## Customizable package exclusions

Usually, a number of packages are almost never used by the developers and could
clutter the language server output while being of little benefit to the users.
Metals would exclude those packages from indexing causing them to not be
recommended for completions, symbol searches, and code actions. Previously that
list was set in stone and consisted of a number of prefixes:

```scala
val defaultExclusions: List[String] = List(
    "META-INF/", "images/", "toolbarButtonGraphics/", "jdk/", "sun/", "javax/",
    "oracle/", "java/awt/desktop/", "org/jcp/", "org/omg/", "org/graalvm/",
    "com/oracle/", "com/sun/", "com/apple/", "apple/"
  )
```

This list might work in most cases, but users might also want to customize the
list according to their preferences and domain they are working on. Starting
with this release it is now possible to define additional exclusions as well as

> remove some from the default list. This can be done via additional Metals user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
remove some from the default list. This can be done via an additional Metals user
```

setting:

```json
"metals.excluded-packages" : [
  "akka.actor.typed.javadsl", "--javax"
]
```

> `--` might be used to remove some of the defaults if they are needed for your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`--` should only be used to remove some of the defaults if they aren't needed for your
```

project. Thanks to [ckipp01](https://github.com/ckipp01) for contributing this
feature!

## Miscellaneous

- New recommended Maven Scala template.
- Fix go to source and auto imports in standalone worksheet files.
- Fix missing classes from \_empty package in tree view.
- Add a command to quickly create a new worksheet with a default name.

> 

Reviewer: So this is just a thought. Take it or leave it if you don't feel like it fits, but I've talked to a few people lately that are always surprised at the amount of work that goes into other projects to make what we do with Metals work. For example, in the last month I know a _significant_ amount of work has gone into Scalameta from @kpbochenek and I know you sent in quite a few fixes for mdoc @tgodzik. What do you think about maybe just mentioning under Miscellaneous something along the lines of:

> As you may know, Metals relies on various other Scalameta projects like [mdoc](https://scalameta.org/mdoc/), which powers worksheets and [Scalameta](https://scalameta.org/), which powers all SemanticDB powered features. There has been some great work done in those projects this last release to unlock and improve Dotty support in Metals. So special thanks to those projects and contributors.

Or something like that? What do you all think?

Author: I think it's a good idea,  Though not sure exactly where to put it :thinking:

Author: I put it to the section here, but changed the working a bit. Let me know what you think!

Reviewer: 👍 looks good!

## Contributors

Big thanks to everybody who contributed to this release or reported an issue!

```

> $ git shortlog -sn --no-merges v0.9.2..v0.9.3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ git shortlog -sn --no-merges v0.9.3..v0.9.4
```

Sublime Text, Atom and Eclipse. Metals is developed at the
[Scala Center](https://scala.epfl.ch/) and [VirtusLab](https://virtuslab.com)
with the help from [Lunatech](https://lunatech.com) along with contributors from
the community.

## TL;DR

Check out [https://scalameta.org/metals/](https://scalameta.org/metals/), and
give Metals a try!

- Scala 0.26.0 and 0.27.0-RC1 support.
- Analyze stacktrace command
- Customizable package exclusions

## Analyze stacktrace command

Thanks to [kpbochenek](https://github.com/kpbochenek), Metals can now help with
navigating stack traces using the new `metals.analyze-stacktrace` command. The
only thing it needs is the actual stack trace string to be input as a parameter
to the command. This new functionality works differently in various editors.

### Visual Studio Code

The only thing users need to do is copy the stack trace and run the
`Analyze Stacktrace` command from the command palette. This will display a new
web view, where it will be possible for users to navigate the files that are
included in the exception.

![stacktrace-vscode](https://i.imgur.com/WBU4hvT.gif)

### coc-metals

> With coc-metals, you just need to copy the stacktrace, whether from sbt,
> bloop-cli, or somewhere else into your register. Once you have it copied, you
> can just execute the metals.analyze-stacktrace command. This will create a
> .metals/stracktrace.scala file which can be used to navigate through your
> stacktrace using code lenses. Keep in mind that you'll want to make sure you
> have codeLens.enable set to true in your configuration. Also, since this feature
> relies on code lenses (virtual text in Nvim), it's only supported in Nvim.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With coc-metals`, you just need to copy the stacktrace, whether from sbt,
bloop-cli, or somewhere else into your register. Once you have it copied, you
can just execute the `metals.analyze-stacktrace` command. This will create a
`.metals/stracktrace.scala` file which can be used to navigate through your
stacktrace using code lenses. Keep in mind that you'll want to make sure you
have codeLens.enable set to true in your configuration. Also, since this feature
relies on code lenses (virtual text in Nvim), it's only supported in Nvim.
```
Just a couple nits so we are consistent.

Author: Fixed!
